All right so in the upcoming lessons on and talk a little bit more about data visualization in particular
I'm going to show you guys how to create some beautiful pie charts.
And afterwards I wanna show you how to create a variation on the pie chart called the doughnut chart.
Now both of these types of charts are very very common especially in business reports.
So it's very important that we also get these two charts under our belt.
The first thing I'll do of course is add another markdown cell and I'll call this number of spam messages
visualized and parentheses.
Pie charts there you go.
Now before we dive into the visualizations we should probably check how many spam how many non spam
messages there are for this are data frames.
Value counts method it's going to be very very handy.
So if we take our data frame and select the category column we can use value on a score counts and then
parentheses to get a breakdown of how many messages of each category we've got.
Here we can see that we've got three thousand nine hundred non spam or ham messages and we've got one
thousand eight hundred and 96 spam messages.
Now since we're gonna be using these numbers later on let's store them in some variables.
So I'll see amount on a score of on a school.
Spam is equal to data.
Category value counts.
Square brackets 1.
And the amount of harm is gonna be equal to the same thing except it's going to be followed by square
brackets zero zero because of access the first value in this series and one to access the second value
in this series.
How do our visualization.
We're gonna be using our old friend not plot lib.
So let's import Matt plot libs pi plot functionality as P L T at the top of our notebook going to our
notebook imports we'll say import
map plot lib dot pie plot as P L T.
Now as usual we're also gonna be adding.
Percent I plot lib in line.
This line of code here is Jupiter notebook specific.
And it allows us to export our images for our chance when we export the notebook.
So if you ever go to Download Download notebook as notebook then if you have this line of code in here
then you get the graphics as well.
All right.
So how do you create one of these friendly pie charts.
The first thing I'll do is I'll create a list of our category names so category underscore names.
It's gonna be equal to a list with the square brackets.
Single quotes spam comma single quotes the git male single quotes and the next thing I'll do is create
another list.
I'm going to call this one sizes for the size of the different pieces of the pie.
This is going to hold on to the amount of spam and it's going to hold on to the amount of ham.
Now we can use these two to generate our chart BLT dot pie parentheses sizes comma and then the labels
of the chart are gonna be equal to the category names with tweet out show we can see what our basic
very very basic pie chart is going to look like now.
I don't recall if I actually pressed shift into a minute earlier on my notebook cell but let me hit
shift enter now and we'll quickly find out.
Nope get my name era PDT t is not defined.
This means that we have to go back up.
Or I do at least I had shift into on my imports.
There we go.
Now I can come down here and actually generate my pie chart and it looks like it is pretty ugly actually.
So we're gonna have to customize this and make it look presentable.
Dress it up.
The first thing I to do is actually make those font sizes on this thing look a bit larger so I can access
the font sizes of my labels here with the property called text props.
Text props is equal to and then curly braces.
Single quotes font size colon say I don't know maybe six.
See what happens.
OK they get even smaller.
Maybe not what I want.
Maybe I'll pick 16.
There we go.
That's a bit better but this whole thing is still very very unconvincing.
For starters I can see that it's not very very sharp on my screen.
So what I can do in this case is manipulate the figure itself so peeled.
He thought figure parentheses fixed size equal to.
I don't know say a two comma two right.
Changing the figure size.
See what this looks like.
It gets a lot smaller but this isn't the only thing I can change on the finger size.
If I wanted to make this whole thing look tack sharp on my screen then I can actually sent the density
of the pixels per inch or DP to whatever my monitor supports.
So I've got a pretty decent monitor that I'm working with him.
It has quite a high resolution so it actually supports two hundred and twenty seven pixels per inch.
And this will have an interesting effect so if a press shift enter now you can see that the whole thing
starts looking first of all a lot larger because it's scaled up and second of all the edges start looking
a bit more clear.
Only thing is my font size is probably a bit too large now so if I go back to font size say 6.
Then it starts looking a bit better like this.
Now when you're working on this project have a play with the different figure sizes the DP values and
the font size and see how it affects your scaling.
You're probably gonna have to use a bit of trial and error to get this thing looking good or looking
the way you wanted to on your monitor.
If you ever want to export this thing and save it to put it into a reporter what have you.
It's probably better to create a larger version of this figure and then just right click and save the
image as a larger image because then if you ever need to include it into a report or into a Word document
or whatever you're using then you can downscale it and look a lot better than taking a small image and
scaling it up.
Now let me pull up the quick documentation on the Pi functionality from that plot lib.
We can actually see that there's quite a few different parameters that we can set.
Let me show you two of them.
I want to show you the start angle which is currently set to none and I want to show you this auto percent
parameter that we've got here and how to use it.
Let's have a play with the start angle first.
So if I set the start angle to zero let's see what we have.
We can see that the chart looks like so then we can see that this blue portion just rotated by 10 degrees
from this position.
You can see this rotation actually very clearly if I start going to 20 30 40 50 and so on the blue piece
starts rotating counterclockwise from the x axis.
So from a straight line that goes from the center out to here.
If I set the start angle to 90 then our chart rotates by exactly one fourth of the way around counterclockwise.
All right.
So that's the start angle.
Now let's have a look at the other property that I wanted to show you.
Auto percent.
And we're gonna set that equal to single quotes percent sign one point one f percent sign a sensor and
what we get now is we get a pie chart where that percent of the chart is displayed on the chart itself.
The formatting is to one decimal point because we've put one point one here.
If instead I had one point two F then it would show me two decimal points.
So depending on the amount of precision that you want on your pie chart you can choose the formatting
of the percent sign as appropriate.
How.
Personally I don't like showing too many digits after the decimal point in most use cases.
You usually want to favor readability over precision when it comes to these visualizations anyhow.
If we wanted to round this to the nearest percentage we can put a zero here and then we'll get 33 and
sixty seven.
Now I find this chart here.
Size wise and formatting wise it's starting to look pretty decent.
The only thing that I don't like.
These are pretty awful colors that it's showing me here by default.
So let's let's change this and try to improve the design a little bit.
Just so we have a record of our old chart.
I'm going to copy this cell and I'm going to paste it below.
Now I've got two different pie charts and I'm going to spice up the design on this one and leave the
other one as it is.
One of my go to places for picking a nice palette is a website called Flat UI colors.
Let's check out this American palette here that they've got the first color that I'm gonna grab is gonna
be maybe pink glamour means I can go back here into my Jupiter notebook and save my colors as a list.
When I call it a custom on a school colors square brackets single quotes paste this is gonna be my first
color color back to the American palette and I'm going to select the color that goes well with this
other category.
So I think something that would be contrasting would be this blue one hit.
So I'm gonna take this one go back here.
Add that as well having added my colors hex codes to a list I can now feed them in as an argument to
my PI method.
So colors equals custom colors and shift into will color in my pie chart and a much more beautiful way
and I've picked some light colors so that the dark text is 33 and 67 percent is still very very readable.
Now one thing you can also do to make the design a little bit snappier is to break out the spam section
here from the legitimate e-mail section so we can actually have a little bit of a gap in between the
two sections and we can do this by supplying an argument here called explode so explode is equal to
and then we also supply a list.
This list will have two values say zero and zero point one.
These numerical values here set the size of the gap.
So let me press shift enter and show you what this would look like so passing in an argument of zero
and zero point one will get the chart looking like this.
If we had zero point five instead then the gap would start looking a lot bigger.
So I set this back to zero point one and I can also medal with the first one here so zero point five
instead of zero and we get again something like this the offset that we're applying here.
If we go to the quick documentation essentially specifies the fraction of the radius with which to offset
each wedge since we have two wedges the red one and the blue one we're supplying two numbers so in my
case I'm offsetting one of them by zero point one.
If I offset both of them by zero point one then the gap between the two wedges doubles.
Now I quite like the look of a small offset zero point one will do for me.
In the next lesson I'll show you how to take these designs a little further and make a donut chart I'll
see you there.